# Bordeaux Engineers Share and Talk #7 - On Blockchain
🕑 *Estimated reading time:* **?mn**

## Table of Contents

## Introduction to blockchain
By Chloé Moreau, Java engineer @ ekino

### Introduction

It is at the end of 2008 that we started hearing about Bitcoin, a cryptocurrency created by an anonymous individual or group called Satoshi Nakamoto, with its first whitebook released the following year. It is what most people know about blockchain but blockchain is not just limited to cryptocurrencies; it is defined as a transparent and decentralized transaction ledger.

Each transaction is signed, added to a block and shared with the whole network. Assymetric encryption is foundational to blockchain; each node, an actor like you and me, has a public key which is generally related to the address of a wallet ad a private key. The whole system works with the concept of consensus; a method shared by everyone in the network to add information to the chain. Each actor is not trusted but the network as a whole is. After a block is accepter through either the Proof of Work or Proof of Stake consensus methods, it is added to the chain and copied locally to the chains of every actor.

There are multiple types of nodes in a blockchain: lightweight, full, mining / staking, etc. Each type has its own specialties. Lightweight nodes will not download the whole blockchain, full nodes make decisions regarding blocks to add and mining or staking participate to the blockchain by creating blocks or storing it. Created blocks will consolidate a set of transactions and get sent to the other nodes of the network.

There are also multiple types of blockchain but to simplify, we will concentrate on either public or private ones. Public blockchains like Bitcoin or Ethereum hold a native currency or native token and no central authority. Private blockchains or "hybrid" or "consortium" have restricted access in read or write with a central authority distributing permissions. Examples of private blockchains include [Hyperledger](https://www.hyperledger.org/) and [MultiChain](https://www.multichain.com/).

### MultiChain

MultiChain is a private blockchain that is simple to install and use. It does not have a native cryptocurrency and exposes an API and a CLI. It is composed of assets, which are elements that hold value exchangeable between users and streams of data stored on which each elements posesses itw own key, an author and generic metadata to ease acces. Basically, streams are an abstraction that enable data storage and archival use cases.

On the permission side, they relate to connection, sending transactions, receiving, issuing assets, creating streams, mining blocks activating users and administer the chain. From the version 2 onwards, it is even possible to create and apply custom permissions. It is important to note however that due to the fact that the chain is private by default, mining is impossible without prior permission. The mining diversity can also be configured to distribute the origins of the blocks to more than one mining node.

MultiChain has integrations for Java, C#, Python, JavaScript, PHP, Go, etc. which makes this technology ideal for Proof of Concepts.

### Questions and Answers session

#### What is an example of blockchain that is not linked to cryptocurrency

SAP uses blockchain to trace prescriptions. You can also use it in conjunction with IoT to track the state of a large network of industrial equipments.