---
categories: ["meetups/best-bdx"]
title: "Bordeaux Engineers Share & Talk #12"
---

{% include time.md %}
{% include toc.md %}

## Bun: new and fast, but is it production-ready?
By Olivier Guillerm, Node Developer @ ekino  

### About Bun

[Bun](https://bun.sh/){:rel="nofollow"} is an ecosystem implemented with [Zig](https://ziglang.org/){:rel="nofollow"} on
top of [JavaScriptCore](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/javascriptcore){:rel="nofollow"}, Apple's JavaScript
runtime. It natively understands both [ECMAScript](https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html){:rel="nofollow"} and [CommonJS](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html){:rel="nofollow"}
modules including in the same file but also TypeScript, Rust, C, Kotlin and many more languages through direct
integration or bindings. Bun chose to be as compatible as possible with existing Node frameworks and its API surface to
simplify adoption.

The selling argument is that Bun is fast in terms of raw speed, I/O and requests per second. Benchmarks indicate that on
trivial cases Bun is must more performant than its rivals. While reading and writing files, results are not as
clear-cut, yet Bun still takes the lead with [Deno](https://deno.com/){:rel="nofollow"}. As for QR Code generation, Bun
loses its lead but uses less RAM. This points at real-world performance being on-par with Node.

### Bun is not a runtime

The difference between a runtime and ecosystem is that the latter will do more than running code. Ecosystems solve the
problem of too much tooling and integration. Bun's package manager and test library are much more efficient and offer a
better Developer eXperience. Bun works with Windows, Linux and macOS and even ships with a build command that can
produce single-file executables!

With that, it's a No-Go for production: the lack of support for HTTP/2, the missing Node APIs and the risk for
performance regressions signals a lack of stability. This is further amplified by the number of GitHub issues, the small
community and an unknown business model. Even though Bun is not sustainable today, it created momentum in Node and Deno
to implement some requested features such as compatibility improvements between ECMAScript and CommonJS modules.

### Questions and Answers
#### What is the footprint of the runtime itself?

It is smaller than that of Node and Deno in terms of size and performance impact.

#### Are common debug features supported?

Yes. This ecosystem is developer-friendly.

## Work less, live better
By Pierre-Alexandre Dupuy, Frontend Lead Engineer @ ekino  

### French people and their pension

The French logic to work states that working more and for longer leads to a better financial situation. This has not
always been true:

- 1936: France adopted the 40h work week, work unions and paid leave;
- 1998: the idea behind the 35h work week was to spread work over more people in a fight against unemployment.

Working harder increases the risk of burnout and psychological breakdown! IT is fantastic as there is always more work
to do in an easily reachable format. The computer invites the worker to commit leisure time for essentially free: people
are not incentivized for delivering more and have the right to disconnect. When the work day or week are over, we must
disconnect and become ourselves again. French citizens must work 172 quarters as of 2024 to earn a pension. This gives
plenty of career time for doing valuable stuff.

When it comes to pensions, IT is privileged. It is well paid and not risky compared to most unskilled or manual labor.
IT workers reaching pension age outlive the average person.

### 80%: less is more

Working 80% is not about compressing a work week into four days, which is essentially the same as working full time and
freeing the worker for one day per week. Lyon's civil servants, the LDLC group, Welcome to the Jungle and RATP are prime
examples of the four-day work week. This has had a great effect on morale and productivity since it gives more time to
rest, the ability to plan medical or administrative appointments and other luxuries that people cannot afford to do
during the week because their work hours align.

80% means lowering the number of hours committed during the work week and the salary at the end of the month. IT workers
live comfortably and can afford to reclaim some of their time. This may not even have an impact on the number of
quarters one must work, though it does have an impact on the pension. 80% is 50 more days of vacation per year, though!

### Getting it

Some situations call for lowering our work week:

- Being a parent: take your parental leave, witness your children grow, plus your salary loss can be partially
  compensated by French public institutions;
- A relative had an incident, you wish to create a company, medical leave: life means more than work. There are many
  reasons to request you work week to be shortened. However, some employers may not hear them...
- Resignation: An employer that treats their workers poorly or as disposable should not be surprised to see them leave.

Younger generations don't share the same priorities: they favor flexibility, recognition and work-life balance. Money is
of course a strong motivator but goodies, an annual retreat and foosball rank lower versus peace of mind.

Living better is defining oneself by your passion, your personality or anything other than work. Try introducing
yourself: when does your profession comes in the list of things you say? If you fall ill on holidays, this is not a
coincidence: it usually means your body understands it is not in "work mode" and that it is not being listened the rest
of the time. Don't have time to go to the gym, the doctor, the psychologist or buy groceries? It is usually not a matter
of time but priority: we have plenty of time to take care of ourselves and our loved ones if we wish to.

Pick up new skills, read, get out, stop using tech! And don't forget to take care of yourself, your place, your loved
ones, your children, and so on.

### Questions and Answers
#### When can I ask for a parental leave?

Depending on how many children were born at the same time, parental leave can be requested until later and more times. [This webpage](https://www.service-public.fr/particuliers/vosdroits/F2280){:rel="nofollow"}
explains it in detail.

## The Art of precision in estimates
By Olga Yasnopolskaya, Frontend Developer @ ekino  

### Shortcomings of estimates

The annual Standish Group Chaos Report finds that 30% of all project do not reach production and 50% go outside budget
and most of it is due to how the project is planned. Waterfall is inflexible and led by lengthy and exhaustive
specifications, leading to the infamous tunnel effect where the customer sees the result of the project after a long
period without being able to influence any of its developments. Agile succeeds three times more frequently.

Let's focus on how Agile sprints are planned and specifically on estimates:

- Estimates are **not reliable**: experienced and "calibrated" teams are more precise, going from 30% of deviation to 15
  to 20% near the end of a project;
- Estimates are **not promises**: like automobiles on a highway, software teams need pit stops to fix stuff and are not
  always aware of spikes and blockers;
- Estimates made by someone **never apply** to someone else: context and experience matter and can never fully be shared
  and this is even more true when two people are in different teams!
- Estimates are **short-lived**: we live in a fast-paced world where everything changes all the time. The project, its
  codebase, people, needs, context. An estimate made today may not be valid anymore in a week.

### Making better estimates

There are techniques that deliver consistently better estimates. It's usual to estimate using person-days as this method
gives immediately usable results even though they probably will not be reliable. This lack of reliability causes time,
quality or scope pressure and leads to budget overruns.

The Fibonacci sequence _—1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13 and so on—_ is a different way to look at the issue. By attributing points to
every task, it becomes easier to track how difficult they are and when they should be split when possible. Some product
owners tend to convert points to time estimates which leads back to the issues with time estimates! These points
represent complexity, not time.

An alternative to points are t-shirt sizes _—S, M, L, XL, XXL_. They unambiguously communicate the complexity of a task,
but they can still be converted to time: there is no perfect system because budgeting is expected for a project. The
level of abstraction brought by t-shirt sizes can help avoid the issue, though.

The [Agile Manifesto](https://agilemanifesto.org/){:rel="nofollow"} recommends responding to change over following a
plan, which would be the premise of the _#NoEstimate_ movement. And while following a plan seems left aside, the
Manifesto states that it bears value: without any plan or budget visibility, the project may deviate into
over-engineering. Time-boxing is not a bad thing!

True time-boxing is actually hard: each project is divided into tasks which are in turn divided into blocks. A block
must be completed in time after which another block starts and then another one and so on until a final retrospective.
There are flexible modes to time-boxing nevertheless the purpose is to get things done.

Estimates originate from one's ego, which makes it difficult to create anchoring points for comparison. In case of
doubt, estimate more and include non-code time (tests, accessibility, more) into the estimate. Always give a range and
listen to other estimates, especially if they come from senior members of the team!

### Questions and Answers
#### When are estimates necessary?

They are necessary whenever budget is limited, which is basically every time. Developers are expensive, therefore the
ROI of every feature must be part of the prioritization process.
